this is a cast of a skeleton of a small
female sperm well I guess the thing that
catches the attention is the lower jaw
lined with these curved backwards-facing
teeth but weirdly it seems that actually
the predatory weapon of a sperm whale is
up here this is where the bulk of the
head sits and it is immense it could
make up as much as a third of the
animal's body length almost all of this
is filled with sperma Ceti that waxy
oily liquid the sounds that the sperm
whale generates are bizarrely created at
the front of the nose traveled back
through the stoma Ceti until they hit
this portion of the skull which is
shaped like a satellite dish a parabola
and it focuses and intensifies the
sounds as they pass back through the
sperma Ceti and then out of this end of
the animal this beam of sound bounces
off objects in the water by listening to
the echos sperm whales build up a
three-dimensional picture of their
surroundings
using this system they can hunt in total
darkness over a thousand meters
underwater
to feel the force of these sounds for
myself I'm heading back out to see
we have a mother and a car approaching
from this side traveling very quickly
and three animals traveling from this
looks like their pods are going to
converge right in front of us
it's possible this could be exactly what
we've been waiting for
if it's a family group there's likely to
be a lot of communication this is my
chance to feel the power of sperm whales
so now
I've dropped right into the middle of a
group of socializing sperm whales
and the sound is overwhelming
the largest males can generate 230
decibels
far louder than a jet plane taking off
the whales seem to be scanning me firing
sonar at my body and visualizing its
shape by listening to the echoes it's
highly directional as the barrel of the
whales head turns towards me I can feel
the sound resonating through my whole
body
and she's giving me a good eyeballing
the biggest sperm whales can be 20
meters long and four times heavier than
a fire engine physically I have little
in common with this super giant yet I
feel closer to it than any of the others
with both creatures with close family
bonds a real sense of curiosity
and a desire to communicate